doc: matter: Added memory profiling guide. (#16683)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/matter/getting_started/memory_profiling.rst

.. _ug_matter_device_memory_profiling:

Profiling memory in Matter applications
#######################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> This guide offers useful commands and Kconfig options for configuring memory sizes for stacks, heaps, and Zephyr settings.

Reviewer: This sounds a little bit like you could configure memory size using commands. How about the following?
```suggestion
This guide offers useful commands for measuring usage of stacks, heaps, and Zephyr settings, and Kconfig options for configuring their memory size.
```

You can learn to measure memory usage and adjust these values according to your project's requirements.

Measuring memory usage
======================

> You can use several predefined Kconfig options and UART shell commands to obtain the current memory statistics from the device.

Reviewer: Isn't "predefined" here and there a little bit redundant, as all Kconfigs are sort of predefined?

> To do this, you can enable the global Matter memory profiling Kconfig, which also activates all other necessary Kconfig options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, you should enable the global Matter memory profiling Kconfig, which also activates all other necessary Kconfig options.
```

Alternatively, you can enable each option separately.

> The Matter memory profiling Kconfig option is a predefined setting that enables all UART shell commands for measuring memory usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Matter memory profiling Kconfig option enables all UART shell commands for measuring memory usage.
```

To enable it, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_MEMORY_PROFILING` Kconfig option to ``y``.

This Kconfig option enables the following functionalities on the Matter device:

- :ref:`ug_matter_configuring_settings_shell` by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_SETTINGS_SHELL` Kconfig option to ``y``.
- :doc:`matter:nrfconnect_examples_cli` by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_LIB_SHELL` Kconfig option to ``y``.
- Zephyr Kernel commands by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_KERNEL_SHELL` Kconfig option to ``y``.
- Zephyr Settings shell by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_SETTINGS_SHELL` Kconfig option to ``y``.
- OpenThread shell by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_SHELL` Kconfig option to ``y`` if you build the Matter over Thread variant.

> - Chip statistics shell by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_STATISTICS` Kconfig option to ``y``.

Reviewer: Also could be useful to mention it allows to track resources used by Matter stack, like packet buffers etc, as statistics sounds a little bit mysterious.
```suggestion
- Matter statistics shell by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_STATISTICS` Kconfig option to ``y``.
```

> All the functionalities listed below are automatically enabled if the Matter memory profiling Kconfig option is activated.

Reviewer: Shouldn't be above instead of below? Also we have the same information mentioned few lines before:

> This Kconfig option enables the following functionalities on the Matter device:

and 

> Alternatively, you can enable each option separately.

However, you can also find the specific Kconfig options required for each functionality to enable them separately.

Heap usage and Matter-related statistics
----------------------------------------

> Requirements:

Author: I've added it there

.. parsed-literal::
   :class: highlight

    CONFIG_SHELL=y
    CONFIG_CHIP_STATISTICS=y
    CONFIG_CHIP_MALLOC_SYS_HEAP_WATERMARKS_SUPPORT=y
    CONFIG_CHIP_MALLOC_SYS_HEAP=y
    CONFIG_SYS_HEAP_RUNTIME_STATS=y

You can measure heap usage by monitoring peak usage.
To do this, you should first reset the current peak measurement, then read the peak usage, perform some operations on the device, and read the peak usage again.

> he difference between the initial and subsequent peak values indicates the number of bytes dynamically allocated by all operations performed by the device during that interval.

Reviewer: It isn't that easy, right? :smile: I think we should mention it may be measured this way, but it will not always work, as some objects may be also destroyed in the meantime, so the peak value will not change even if we allocated several things. 
```suggestion
The difference between the initial and subsequent peak values indicates the number of bytes dynamically allocated by all operations performed by the device during that interval.
```

This method allows you to check for memory leaks or determine the amount of memory specific operations dynamically allocate.
By using these results, you can adjust the maximum heap size for your application, thereby optimizing RAM usage for other purposes.

To measure the current peak heap usage, use the following UART shell command on your device:

.. code-block:: console

    uart:~$ matter stat peak

As a result you will get the following log:

.. code-block:: console

    Packet Buffers: 0
    Timers: 2
    TCP endpoints: 0
    UDP endpoints: 1
    Exchange contexts: 0
    Unsolicited message handlers: 5
    Platform events: 1
    Heap allocated bytes: 208

You can read the ``Heap allocated bytes`` value to learn about the current peak usage.
In addition to heap statistics, you can also obtain other information about the Matter stack from this command.

To clear the peak usage, use the following UART shell command on your device:

.. code-block:: console

    uart:~$ matter stat reset

> NVS Settings storage usage

Reviewer: I think that NVS shortcut was not introduced before
```suggestion
Non-Volatile Storage (NVS) Settings usage
```

--------------------------

Requirements:

.. parsed-literal::
   :class: highlight

    CONFIG_SHELL=y
    CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_SETTINGS_SHELL=y

The NVS Settings usage may change during the device's lifetime.

> In Matter samples, if you set the ``storage_partition``size, you cannot change it using a firmware update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Matter samples, if you set the ``storage_partition`` size, you cannot change it using a firmware update.
```

It is possible only by reflashing the device with new code that includes a new partition layout.
Therefore, it is crucial to calculate and set the appropriate ``storage_partition`` size according to the project requirements, such as enabled endpoints, the cryptographic backend used, or the number of supported Matter fabrics.

If this functionality is enabled, you can use :ref:`ug_matter_configuring_settings_shell`.

To see the full list of available commands, use the following UART shell command on your device:

.. code-block:: console

    uart:~$ matter_settings

> You will see a list of the available commands like this one:

Reviewer: Are you sure about this? If I type it I get:

uart:~$ matter_settings
Please specify a subcommand.

Maybe it's because by default we use SHELL_MINIMAL.

.. code-block:: console

    peak      : Print peak settings size in Bytes. This size is reset during
              reboot.
              Usage: matter_settings peak
    reset     : Reset peak settings size in Bytes.
                Usage: matter_settings reset
    get_size  : Get size of the chosen settings entry.
                Usage: matter_settings get_size <name>
    current   : Get current settings size in Bytes.
                Usage: matter_settings current
    free      : Get free settings space in Bytes.
                Usage: matter_settings free

> Similarly to heap measurements, you can reset the current peak usage value, read the peak value, perform some operations on the device, and read the peak value again to obtain the difference.

Reviewer: As for the heap, checking the peak value is ok if we have no other option, but here maybe it would be better to use `current`.

.. code-block:: console

    uart:~$ matter_settings reset

To measure the peak usage, use the following UART shell command on your device:

.. code-block:: console

    uart:~$ matter_settings peak

You can also read a specific settings entry size by calling ``matter_settings get_size <name>`` UART shell command on your device.
To obtain the name of an entry, you can use the ``settings list`` command form the ``settings`` UART shell command set.

To read a specific settings entry size complete the following steps:

1. Read all available settings list:

    .. code-block:: console

        uart:~$ settings list

    .. code-block:: console

        mt/g/im/ec
        mt/g/gdc
        mt/g/gcc
        mt/g/lkgt
        mt/ctr/reboot-count
        mt/cfg/unique-id
        its/0000000000020001

#. Choose one of the available key, for example ``mt/ctr/reboot-count`` to read size of the reboot counter.
#. Read the size of the chosen key:

    .. code-block:: console

        matter_settings get_size mt/ctr/reboot-count

To learn about other ``settings`` UART shell commands use the following UART shell command on your device:

.. code-block:: console

>     uart:~$ settings

Reviewer: Same here, I do not get help after typing `settings` but error about missing subcomand.

    0x20006930 BT TX                            (real size 1536):	unused 1080	usage  456 / 1536 (29 %)
    0x20006d08 rx_q[0]                          (real size 1536):	unused 1384	usage  152 / 1536 ( 9 %)
    0x20006e18 openthread                       (real size 4096):	unused 3432	usage  664 / 4096 (16 %)
    0x20007be8 ot_radio_workq                   (real size 1024):	unused  848	usage  176 / 1024 (17 %)
    0x20006768 shell_uart                       (real size 3200):	unused 2104	usage 1096 / 3200 (34 %)
    0x20002580 nrf5_rx                          (real size 1024):	unused  832	usage  192 / 1024 (18 %)
    0x2000d510 sysworkq                         (real size 1152):	unused  880	usage  272 / 1152 (23 %)
    0x20007b10 MPSL Work                        (real size 1024):	unused  808	usage  216 / 1024 (21 %)
    0x2000d3a0 idle                             (real size  320):	unused  272	usage   48 /  320 (15 %)
    0x2000d458 main                             (real size 6144):	unused 4584	usage 1560 / 6144 (25 %)
    0x20025d00 IRQ 00                           (real size 2048):	unused 1120	usage  928 / 2048 (45 %)

> You can read the peak usage measurement for each thread and to learn about the total size of the stack, and unused bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can read the peak usage measurement for each thread and learn about the total size of the stack, and unused bytes.
```

Using these estimations you can adjust the stack values for your application.

Configuring memory usage
========================

Most of the Matter samples in |NCS| have a safe configuration that assumes a high number of free space for heap, stacks, and settings partition sizes.

> After measuring the memory usage, you may want to adjust the memory parameters according to your project requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After measuring the memory usage, you may want to adjust the memory parameters according to your project's requirements.
```

The following sections present a guide on how to adjust specific maximum memory values.

> Settings usage

Reviewer: If we want to describe it here, remember we have to set `CONFIG_SETTINGS_NVS_SECTOR_COUNT` in the consistent way. Also note that we have similar information mentioned (not that detailed) in `ug_matter_device_bootloader_partition_layout`, so maybe it would be good to extend it there and only put ref link here, or something.

1. Locate the :file:`pm_static_nrf52840dk_nrf52840.yml` in the Matter Template sample directory.
#. Locate the ``settings_storage`` partition within the ``pm_static`` file.

   For example:

   .. code-block:: console

       settings_storage:
           address: 0xf8000
           size: 0x8000
           region: flash_primary

#. Modify the ``size`` value.
#. Align all other partitions to not overlap any memory regions.
   To learn more how to configure partitions in the :file:`pm_static` file see the :ref:`partition_manager` documentation.

Stack sizes for all threads
---------------------------

Each thread has its own Kconfig option to configure the maximum stack size.
You can modify Kconfig values to increase or decrease the maximum stack sizes according to your project requirements.

The following table presents the possible threads used in a Matter application and the Kconfig options dedicated to setting the maximum stack usage for each of them:

+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+

> | Thread name         | Kconfig option                                                   | The stack description to which the config is related.          |

Author: I wrote thread names as they are presented in the shell. I guess it will be more helpful for customers if we don't format them.

+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| mbox_wq             | :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_IPC_SERVICE_BACKEND_RPMSG_WQ_STACK_SIZE` | Inter Processor Communication                                  |
|                     |                                                                  | (For multi-processors targets only)                            |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+

Heap size
---------

The Matter application defines the static size of the heap used by all memory allocations.
This configuration ignores the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_HEAP_MEM_POOL_SIZE` Kconfig option value in the application configuration.
The static size is determined by the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_MALLOC_SYS_HEAP` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_MALLOC_SYS_HEAP_OVERRIDE` Kconfig options.
You can set them to ``n`` to start using a dynamic heap size on your Matter device.

> The default static heap size means that you can define the maximum heap size for your application by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_MALLOC_SYS_HEAP_SIZE` Kconfig value.

Author: This sentence means that if you don't enable this Kconfig option the heap will be used dynamically and there is no need to define the heap size. I will rewrite it since indeed it looks weird. :)

You can also adjust the heap dedicated for mbedTLS purposes by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MBEDTLS_HEAP_SIZE` Kconfig option value.

Memory profiling troubleshooting
================================

> While manipulating memory sizes, you may experience various bugs and faults on your device.

Reviewer: Bugs sound scary :smile: It's not a bug if someone uses too small stack, so maybe let's call it an issue?  
```suggestion
While manipulating memory sizes, you may experience various issues and faults on your device.
```

Author: ok 😄

Many of these issues can be caused by incorrect stack or heap configurations.
In this section, you will find some useful tips that you can use when setting new values for memory sizes, especially if you regularly notice problems with your application.

- Check the thread name from which the fault originates:

  If you notice a fault on your Matter device, analyze the logs to find the thread that was executing when the error occurred.
  Sometimes, if there is not enough space in a specific thread, a crash may occur.

>   In such cases, you may consider increasing the size of the stack dedicated to that thread.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  In such cases, consider increasing the size of the stack dedicated to that thread.
```

>   You can search through the table above and change the value of the specific Kconfig option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Find the thread in the table above and change the value of the corresponding Kconfig option.
```
Could also link to the table directly. You'll need to add a ref target like is used for headings, and then use "the :ref:`thread and Kconfig option <ref target>` table".

> - The code fails on ``calloc/malloc`` functions.

Reviewer 2: Should this be ``calloc``/``malloc``?

  If your code fails on functions that allocate dynamic memory, try increasing the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CHIP_MALLOC_SYS_HEAP_SIZE` Kconfig value.

> - Fails while executing some cryptographic operations on nRF54 SoC series.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The code fails while executing some cryptographic operations on an nRF54 Series SoC.
```

>   Currently, most cryptographic operations on the nRF54 SoC series use the current thread's stack to store operating data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Currently, most cryptographic operations on the nRF54 Series use the current thread's stack to store operating data.
```

Stack usage for all threads
---------------------------

Requirements:

.. parsed-literal::
   :class: highlight

    CONFIG_SHELL=y
    CONFIG_KERNEL_SHELL=y

You can also measure the current stack value of each thread running on the Matter device.
This measurement may help in setting the proper stack value and saving RAM space for other stacks or the heap.

To see all statistics for each running thread, use the following UART shell command on your device:

.. code-block:: console
    kernel threads

You will see the similar statistics as following ones, the number of threads may be different:

.. code-block:: console

    Scheduler: 6 since last call
    Threads:
    0x2000d330 CHIP
        options: 0x0, priority: 1 timeout: 25596001528
        state: pending, entry: 0x60831
        stack size 6144, unused 3888, usage 2256 / 6144 (36 %)

    0x20007ff8 openthread
        options: 0x0, priority: -8 timeout: 0
        state: pending, entry: 0x4ed05
        stack size 4096, unused 3440, usage 656 / 4096 (16 %)

    0x200091f0 main
        options: 0x1, priority: 0 timeout: 240303
        state: pending, entry: 0x4de05
        stack size 6144, unused 4328, usage 1816 / 6144 (29 %)

> You can read a line starting with ``stack size`` for each thread to learn about the total size of the stack, unused bytes, and the current usage.

Author: I will change it to kernel stacks, but are you sure that these values are the peak ones?

> You can read a line starting with ``stack size`` for each thread to learn about the total size of the stack, unused bytes, and the current usage.

Reviewer 3: maybe `kernel threads` show current stack size. I think documenting both of them can be useful.

> You can read a line starting with ``stack size`` for each thread to learn about the total size of the stack, unused bytes, and the current usage.

Author: I've changed it to kernel stacks and described it as the peak value.
